---
layout: post
title:  "2024 Math League #5 P6, 2 Hours of my Life, and a Miserable Tuesday"
date:   2024-02-13 21:04:01
categories: post
---

This is a *sad, sad* story.  

On the afternoon of the 13th of February, 2024, I walked into the dining hall, ready for the math league. I did not know at the time how this experience will change me *forever*.  

I rushed through problems 1 through 5, and started reading problem 6. It went a little something like this: {% marginnote 'one' 'This may not be the exact way that it is written, and there could a chance that it does not resemble the actual problem whatsoever.' %}  

{{ "{% maincolumn 'assets/img/2024-02-13-problem.png' 'From Math League Press, 2024, Competition #5, Problem 6.' "}} %}  

"Exact value", I thought. There must be some extremely clever way to solve this that yields a single, maybe two trig functions, with a coefficient or two. Otherwise, it could not possibly fit into the impossibly small square on the answer sheet.  

To yield something like this, I thought, there is probably only two starting points to work from: one being the right angle on the bottom left (however, this did not seem clever enough for me at the time), and the other one being the 60 degrees angle on the top right.{% marginnote 'two' 'When I was taking classes in China, tricks like this were incredibly common, and sometimes even the absolute central piece of the math section of the Highschool Entrance Test' %} If it is going to be something clever, I would probably have to construct an equilateral triangle or something like that.  

I worked toward my vision on a paper towel, but the 30 minutes quickly passed by. When there was 2 minutes remaining, I turned toward the most stupid method I could possibly think of - constructing a rectangle around the quadrilateral, and removing the two triangle that were not included in the quadrilateral. Unfortunately for me, time was up before I could get even a decimal approximation.  

I rushed home and demanded an explanation from myself. I got a few sheets of paper handy and got to work.  

Soon, more than an hour has passed. I figured that I could not continue wasting my time like this, and settled for the "dumb" method. Little did I know, it only ate up more of my time. It was a trig equation to solve. It was absolutely humongous, and my unfamiliarity with trig identities only frustrated me even more.  

After one more hour of hand calculation, furiously tapping on the calculator, and even giving up my pride to consult Wolfram Alpha, the reality and a murky realization has dawned on me. There is no way to simplify this mess. It is the final answer. It matched the answer given by Desmos. The expression looked something like this:  

$$ \frac{-6(3\sqrt{3}cos(20^{\circ})-6cos(10^{\circ})+4sin(40^{\circ})-13sin(20^{\circ})-4(2sin(10^{\circ})+1)\sqrt{3})}{cos(40^{\circ})+1} $$  

It is ugly. It is untolerable. But worse than all of that, it is *correct*.  

I realized that "exact" probably just meant a "good enough" decimal approximation that showed I was not guessing.  

Minutes later, I realized something way worse. I have blundered 2 of the easier problems, both of which should have been so easy for me, just because I was looking for this exact solution.  

If anyone even cares, This was how my Tuesday went.